---
layout: post
title:      "The Programmatic Philosophy of The Matrix"
date:       2020-03-08 00:28:30 +0000
permalink:  the_programmatic_philosophy_of_the_matrix
---


The theme most familiar to most of the audience of The Matrix trilogy is that the "matrix" itself is a simulated reality programmed by robots to subdue humanity.  The very nature of the "matrix" lies in the fact that every experience, every object, and all the forces of nature are all actually lines of code designed to execute their functions seamlessly to create a virtual experience.  Even in this world there are adherences to common programming practices and references to how systems are built in real life, like the Model View Controller concepts in web frameworks.  

The model in the "matrix" can be compared to the Architect, the designer of the Matrix who built the underlying concepts of how the world functions, and set the rules to govern how the "matrix" operates.  The Architect is in charge of maintaining the data (human minds) in the system and the overall state of the system itself by changing conditions and providing instructions on how to re-instate equilibrium, or a stable state of the system.  As initially explained to Neo, the whole concept of "The One" is also a design of the Architect that helps to ensure complete adherence to the system, and to forcibly correct undesired patterns from emerging.  The rules stipulated by the Architect governs how the controllers (the programs who are in charge of making the wind blow, the birds fly, etc) should shape the bits of code that will come to represent the "view" that inhabitants see.

The view is the vast amalgamation of the experiences felt by the inhabitants of the system, and can be seen as the final interpretation of how the Architect designed the system.  Ultimately, the view is the only accessible part of the system available to it's inhabitants, save for Neo.  As the "One", Neo can actually interact beyond the view and change "reality" as demonstrated by his supernatural abilities of flight and ressurection, among other powers.  The same concept for web frameworks of seperation of concerns, is the same reason why humans who reject the system feel like they are living in a dream, but cannot comprehend the reality behind this dream.  There is no direct connection between the view, and the "source" (which is basically just the Model code), thus the system cannot be altered by it's users.  Although the "Agents" in the system display some of the powers afforded to Neo, it is because they are "created" with these functions, as dictated by the controller that makes the agents, whereas Neo was able to obtain functions that were not originally part of his "view".

The controllers in the "matrix" can be akin to the various programs (some embodied physically, like Sati) that have a direct line of sight to the information being passed to them by the Architect.  There are mentions of previous iterations of the system that inevitably failed due to a lack of understanding by the Architect, where the instructions caused the system to be rejected by it's inhabitants.  When Neo meets the Oracle she describes to him the Agents that control the system, to the natural forces like wind, are all governed by rules that dictate their behavior.  It can be likely assumed that since humans are the only "minds" in the system, everything else is created artificially.  The controllers for plants and animals can be considered as Class structures, that create and govern plants, animals, the weather, and everything else that appears in the system.  The Class structures, properly defined by the Architect is designed to create a facisimile of the real world so close to the real thing, that 99% of inhabitants cannot tell the difference.  



